Dataset Source:

https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/alessandrolobello/agri-food-co2-emission-dataset-forecasting-ml

https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/zgrcemta/world-gdpgdp-gdp-per-capita-and-annual-growths

1. What is in your data?

Our project combines two datasets from kaggle. The first dataset 'Agri-food CO2 emission dataset- Forecasting ML' describes CO2 emissions coming from the agri-food industry in 236 distinct countries from 1990-2020. The variables measured over this time period include emissions from Savanna fires, forest fires, crop residues, rice cultivation, drained organic soils, pesticides manufacturing, food product transportation, net forest conversion, household food consumption, food retail, on-farm electricity, food packaging, agrifood systems waste disposal, food processing, manufactoring fertilizers, Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU), manure applied to soil, manure left on pastures, fires on organic soils, fires in humid tropical forests, and on-farm energy use. Other demographic variables in this dataset are rural, urban, and total (male/female) populations. Additionally, total emissions, land covered by forests, and average temperature is recorded for each country. All of the data was taken from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United States and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The other dataset in our project uses data from the World Bank, which measures GDP per capita for 266 different countries over the years of 1960-2020.

After merging these two datasets and exploring the data, we have some useful insights from our line plot that displays total CO2 emissions from 1990-2020 in Austrailia, Brazil, Canada, China, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Myanmar, Thailand, United States, and the Russian Rederation. While China clearly became the highest CO2 emitter over time, other countries show interesting trends. For instance, Indonesia has a huge spike in CO2 emissions around 1997 that made it the country with the largest total emissions during that time period; meanwhile, Brazil was the highest CO2 emitter in 1990 but had a huge drop in emissions around 2010. 


2. How will these data be useful for studying the phenomenon you're interested in?

Agriculture related CO2 emissions are responsible for around 60 percent of worldwide emissions and are expected to increase with population growth. Our project will use the emissions data in the Agri-food dataset and compare that with financial data from the world bank dataset. We plan on conducting a few different sets of analyses, but the main one is to model how agricultural emissions will change in the future (10, 20 years). This is feasible given the datasets longevity (both spanning back to at least 1990), as well as their variety and specificity. Both datasets have multiple variables that can be used to conduct analyses. As an environmental science major, looking through the agri-food dataset was encouraging as it contained pretty much every source of CO2 emissions related to agriculture. As well as predicting how emissions will change over time, we are also interested in looking at where they will change the most. Often, developing or third world countries are accused of causing the most harm to the environment. But is this fair accusation from developed countries if we normalize for economic strength or population? Comparing how emissions change with growing populations and developing economies around the world is fascinating and can give insights into how we can simultaneously fight climate change and feed the world. 

3. What are the challenges you've resolved or expect to face in using them?

One challenge we faced was combining the two datasets that we have chosen to analyze. Each dataset contains data (on GDP or agrofood emissions) from the last few decades for different geographical areas. We joined these datasets together by geographical area, 
however, the two datasets have variation in naming for this variable. For example, the agrofood dataset contains data from both 
“China” and “China, mainland” while the GDP dataset does not. The GDP dataset lists certain categoriesunder geographical areas that are not in the agrofood dataset, such as “Fragile and conflict affected situations” or “Least developed countries: UN classification.” Additionally, the agrofood dataset contains data from 1990-2020 while the GDP dataset begins in 1960. These variations required more effort in the data cleaning process when combining the datasets, and we will likely have to leave out certain geographical areas from the GDP dataset. Although the GDP dataset contains more geographical areas, it also contains a large amount of missing data. Because of this, we may not be able to find significant relationships between certain variables or make accurate predictions for geographical areas/years with too much missing data. To resolve this issue, if a country was missing more than 5 years of data, we dropped it from the set. Otherwise, we calculated the mean GDP for that geographical area and imputed it into the dataset. We also dropped unnecessary columns which also got rid of a significant amount of missing values. 
